This convention program will be translated into more than 400 languages.
This work is supported by branch offices around the globe.
Each of us has an opportunity to show appreciation for the spiritual blessings we have received in our own language.
One way we can do this is by making voluntary gifts in accord with our circumstances.
Donations can be made online at donate.jw.org.
Please be seated. Have you faced serious obstacles as you try to do what Jehovah commands?
How conservants of God maintain their joy despite such challenges?
We invite you to watch and learn from the drama Nehemiah. The joy of Jehovah is your stronghold, Part 1.
As we learned in our audio drama, the Jews returned to Jerusalem to rebuild the temple in 537 BCE.
And by 515 BCE, it was finally completed. However, the city's walls were still left in ruins.
Jehovah's time had now come to rebuild the walls and he used the faithful man Nehemiah to take the lead in this work.
This would be a massive undertaking for the Jews. And once again, there were opposers.
Nehemiah told the nation of Israel that the joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.
How could he encourage them to be joyful despite all the opposition?
What lessons can we learn from their example? There are many. But here are three to think about as you watch.
What role did prayer play in helping Nehemiah to be a courageous person for Jehovah?
In addition to direct attacks, what schemes did the enemies employ to oppose the work?
Despite setbacks, what was Nehemiah's main source of joy?
Got it? All right then. With that in mind, please sit back and enjoy the following video presentation.
The joy of Jehovah is your stronghold.
It was a privilege to have a share in the restoration of Jehovah's worship.
People know we rebuilt the wall, but there is so much more to the story.
Let's start at the beginning.
In the 20th year of King Arduzirksi's linger maintenance, I was in Shushan the palace.
I was cut bearer to the king. He trusted me with his life.
Although I was far from Jerusalem, I found great joy just thinking about our people there, serving Jehovah.
Until one day, when I received a visit from my brother Henei, that visit changed everything.
What's going on Henei? How are people?
Not good.
The conditions are disgraceful.
The walls of Jerusalem are broken down, and its gates have been burned with fire.
What about the temple?
It stands, but the services are nothing but empty rituals.
Most of the people and the priests ignore God's law.
You have to return with us.
For days, my conscience plagued me.
Would the king even allow me to go?
Our people had sinned by not keeping Jehovah's commandments.
But now I felt as if I were sinning, by not helping them in their time of need.
I begged Jehovah to grant me success.
Nirmaya, why are you so gloomy when you're not sick?
This can be nothing but gloominess of heart.
Why should I not look gloomy?
When this city, the place where my forefathers are buried lies in ruins.
And its gates have been consumed by fire.
What is this?
Speak frankly, what are you seeking?
At once, I prayed to the God of the heavens if it pleases the king.
And if your servant has found favor with you, send me to Judah,
to the city where my forefathers are buried, and let me rebuild it.
You may go.
Jehovah was with us.
The king gave me supplies, an army, and an appointment as governor.
We were on our way to help rebuild Jerusalem's walls.
I had seen a portion of the city, but it wasn't until I rose by night to inspect the walls.
That I saw just how badly God's city had been treated.
I couldn't believe the destruction.
The time had come to reveal Jehovah's purpose for Jerusalem.
I gathered the leaders.
Who is this man?
I'm told he's Nehemiah, cut bare to the king.
What does he want from us?
Men, the holy city is completely vulnerable.
Let us rebuild the walls of Jerusalem so that this disgrace will not continue.
But what will our neighbors think?
We have many powerful enemies.
Our desertsys commissioned me to rebuild the walls in the entire city.
Didn't you see the horseman he sent?
And all the timber, he gave it all.
Brothers, the good hand of our God was upon me.
He is the one to fear, not men.
He will give us success.
Not everyone was happy that we had come to do something good for the people of Israel.
So that's what this Nehemiah is up to.
Geesham, do you see what I'm saying?
Without a wall, we can keep the Jews under control.
If they rebuild it, the Jews won't need our land or resources.
That means he's planning to rebel.
We can't let him.
We must act and act together.
Are you with me?
You have my support.
And mine, as always.
Good.
We must go to Jerusalem to keep an eye on Nehemiah.
The opposers wanted to maintain control and to profit from Jehovah's people.
They wasted a little time trying to intimidate us.
Who are these?
That's Sam Ballet, governor of Samaria.
Next to him is Tobiah, an Ammonite official, landowner to many of our people.
The helicopter.
That's Geesham.
He's a very wealthy Arabian and close ally to Sam Ballet.
Nehemiah.
Are you rebellion against the king?
The king himself gives us the authority.
To rebuild the city and the wall?
To rebuild the city and the wall is what the king expects us to do.
Why did you not consult with me?
I am the governor of Samaria.
Well, yes.
But the king appointed Nehemiah as governor of Judah.
So why have you not asked for our help?
We worship Jehovah too.
We've sacrificed him for generations.
Along with sacrifices to all of your other gods.
The God of the heavens is the one that will grant us success.
And we his servants, we will get up and build.
No one should let his religious beliefs come before national unity.
But you have neither share nor claim nor memorial in Jerusalem.
Sam Ballet.
Could it be you who is rebelling against the highest king of all?
Despite opposition, the people work strenuously.
Their struggles went far beyond building a wall.
Jehovah remembers brothers like Pilith.
Seeing how he dealt with personal challenges.
Strength in my faith.
Pilith, right here.
We'll never finish this work.
It's not about rubble.
These were trying to make a change.
Always an optimist.
By the way, you're late on your rent.
Again.
Rayham, I'm sorry.
I need more time.
With the work on the wall.
I have enough troubles.
Look, if I don't get payment by the end of the month,
you and your family are out.
Is there anything we can do?
Maybe I can work it off.
Till we get caught off.
Seriously, you don't have time to work it off.
But maybe your daughter can help.
She can come stay with us.
Is this slave?
No.
I'll hire her to help Azuba.
To pay off your debt.
Look, I'm trying to help.
But you don't have many options to have my friend.
Think about it.
So, Rayham spoke to me today.
About what?
He wants to hire Simka to help Azuba in the house.
And he says he'll care for her like his own daughter.
I've known Rayham and Azuba ever since I came here with Ezra.
Rayham helped us.
Our house belongs to him.
I don't trust him.
He wants our Simka to live with him?
Yeah.
What about Jehovah's Command?
The parents raised their own children.
Don't you want her to have a better life?
I cannot agree.
To having her live apart from us.
Even if we have to survive on cleanings.
No, you know we'll survive it all.
Because Jehovah always takes care of those who love and obey him.
Men like Pilith, through their burden on Jehovah,
and kept working.
Sinballet set up camp near Jerusalem
to keep an eye on our progress.
So, what is it?
My lord.
Yes?
The wall.
It's up to half its height all around the city.
This has gone too far.
Gisham, how long will it take to assemble an attack force?
Attack force?
My lord, Sinballet.
An attack on the Jews.
Being an attack on the king.
What are you talking about?
He's right.
Nehemiah has authorization from our exercies himself.
You saw how many horsemen the king sent with him.
Yes.
Would you be talking like this if those horsemen were still here?
And they can come back.
Nonsense.
Never mind the horsemen.
This is my province.
Out here, I decide what to do.
Now, we need to threaten them.
Gisham, you bring Samaritan troops.
They're prepared to attack us.
How do you know that?
I heard them talking.
Brothers, please.
Have they attacked anyone yet?
They must have.
They saw something.
Are you gonna wait until they start killing us?
Of course not.
Henei.
Postmen by families at the lowest parts of the wall,
at all the exposed places.
Yes, Nehemiah.
Brothers, if we let mere threats frighten us in a stopping,
they will have achieved their goal.
It's no use.
Don't you see these people hate what we're doing?
They hate us.
You don't have to live and work around them like we do.
Brothers, where is your faith?
It is Jehovah's will that we build this wall.
It is really Jehovah's will,
and why are we getting all this opposition?
Maybe this isn't the right time.
Besides, this work is too much for us.
We're worn out.
Why do we need a wall anyway?
To protect Jehovah's people.
Brothers, do not be afraid of them.
Remember Jehovah who is great and awe-inspiring.
And fight for your brothers,
your sons and daughters,
your wives and homes.
So when you hear the sound of the horn,
gather together to where we are.
Our God will fight for us.
Listen for this signal.
The threats are working.
Next sound they hear will be our battle cry.
Wait.
We already spoke about this.
A direct attack would be seditious.
Besides, they've armed themselves.
Wait.
I-I-I Lord.
Keishan's right.
He would never get away with this.
Don't you recall who commissioned Nehemiah?
Was the king.
The king of Persia?
Let me remind you.
Nehemiah setting himself up as a king.
I recommend you turn the accusation of sedition against Nehemiah.
That's brilliant.
Yes.
People beg for our help.
Let's go back to Samaria.
You look like you've been working.
Almost like it, too.
Yes.
Yes, you do.
Brothers.
Brothers, we are well on our way to completing the wall.
Jehovah's helping us.
But we must not let our hands drop.
From now on, we will all spend the night inside Jerusalem.
We will take turns keeping watch.
And a night we'll give out assignments.
Good work today.
I was working hard on the wall, but there were more issues to contend with.
My brothers, how can I help you?
Nehemiah, we, with our sons and daughters, are many.
We need food to stay alive.
We gave our fields and vineyards and houses as security to get grain during the food shortage.
We borrowed money on our fields and our vineyards to pay the king's tribute.
And we've had to sell some of our children in dislavery.
And we're powerless to stop this, because our fields and vineyards belong to others.
Thank you for bringing this to my attention.
I must ponder all this.
Thank you, Nehemiah.
Haneinah, please tell all the nobles and deputy rulers to come to me first thing tomorrow morning.
With God's help, we can make this right.
Men of Judah, each of you is demanding interest from your brother.
You should be shamed of yourselves.
Should you not walk in the fear of our God so that the nations, our enemies, cannot reproach us?
Let us please stop this blending on interest.
Please restore to them their fields, vineyards, all of groves and houses, and the interest.
Nehemiah, I will restore the fields.
This day at sunset.
We all will restore these things to our brothers.
Before Jehovah, do you swear to these promises?
We do.
May the true God shake out from his house every man who does not carry out this promise.
Amen.
Michelle, we best inform Tobiah about this.
This will be successful.
Jehovah will bless.
I bring good news.
Is that so?
Yes.
We have your rent.
All?
Come by any time and collect it.
But I thought we...
I think what about Simka?
She'll be staying with us.
Well, how are you able to put it together so quickly?
Jehovah always takes care of those who love and obey him.
Ever since Nehemiah got here,
things have been getting better and better.
Me and my thanks were still as young as when we came here with Ezra.
I've worked hard.
But now Nehemiah treats us like it all fell out of heaven, and we just have to pick it up.
I've worked hard for what I have.
Didn't I?
Yes, you worked hard.
If I get back my fields, what am I to eat?
What am I to drink?
What's wrong with lending on interest?
You borrow, you pay, with interest.
Reham, Jehovah just wants us to treat our brothers fairly.
Did you hear the word I said? I treat everyone fairly.
Why are you so angry?
I'm not angry.
Why are you talking to me like this?
I just feel betrayed.
By the people I've lent money to.
What can I do about it?
Only what a wife is supposed to do?
Give me a son!
If not a son, then a daughter.
I cannot give you, which Jehovah does not give us.
One day, it will be too late.
My lord, St. Ballet.
Now what?
The wall has no more gaps.
What?
How can they advance so quickly?
Also, there's a letter for Tobaya.
Neomaya is forcing landlords to return their fields to the original owners.
We're running out of time.
Enough.
Tell this to Neomaya.
Come.
And let us set a time to meet together in the valley plain of Ono.
They're trying to lure me away from Jerusalem and of you.
Please tell your master, I'm engaged in a great work,
and I'm not able to go down.
Why should the work stop while I leave it to come to you?
They sent me the same message several times.
Each time I gave them the same response.
He has rejected your offer a fourth time.
Geesham, it's time to implement your plan.
Tobaya, write this down.
Among the nations, it has been heard.
And Geesham is also saying that you and the Jews are scheming to rebel.
That is why you are building the wall.
Yes?
Give this to Neomaya.
Tell your master, none of the things you are saying have taken place.
You are making them up out of your own imagination.
They're bluffing.
They're trying to frighten us in the stopping work.
Yes, they know that the king won't change his decree.
But believe me, they won't stop.
Jehovah, I pray strengthen my hands.
What can we do to stop them?
We don't have much time.
The wall is almost complete.
San Ballet.
I think I know a way.
Shema, are you calling for me?
Yes.
You are in great danger.
And so am I, because I know about it.
Talk sense, man, what danger?
They're coming to kill you.
By night, we must go into the temple and close the doors.
Shema, should a man like me run away?
You don't understand.
No.
What would that do to the spirit of the entire nation?
It's the only safe place.
Besides, I'm not a priest.
If I entered the temple, that would be valid reason to kill me.
I will not go in.
That decision would be foolish, Shema.
Oh, I see.
Tobiah and San Ballet put you up to this dint that you hypocrite.
May Jehovah remember them.
And all of you false prophets who keep trying to frighten me.
Come, Haneini, we have work to do.
We just kept working day and night.
But before we knew it, we were finishing the very last section of the wall.
But helped us to achieve the impossible.
We were tired.
But we discovered something we had lost.
It's from Shemaia.
What does it say?
The wall's complete.
But George are left to be put in.
San Ballet, we must act quickly.
San Ballet.
Tobiah.
There's still time.
Write that letter to the people.
Don't you see?
God must be helping the Jews.
It's over.
We'll lose all control over them.
This isn't over.
Only the beginning.
We would definitely need God's help for what was coming next.
Are you now eager to see the conclusion of the drama?
We will enjoy part two during the final session of this convention.
The account of Nehemiah teaches us to trust in Jehovah as we carry out our assigned work.
Throughout this session and the preceding one, we have been focusing on the vital work of making disciples.
Do you recall the key lessons?
Also, what disciple-making work do we look forward to in the future?
Please pay close attention to Brother Stephen led of the governing body as he delivers the talk,
making disciples now, prepares us for new world disciple-making.
There are many things in life that prepare a person for greater things.
For example, elementary school prepares a student for high school.
Running shorter races prepares a person to run a marathon.
Working as an apprentice prepares a worker to serve as a professional.
Well, in this talk, we're going to discuss how that disciple-making now prepares us
for the greater disciple-making work in the new world.
But first, let's briefly discuss how making disciples right now brings a lot of joy.
Please turn to Psalm 105.
Now, this is the theme scripture for today's program.
Psalm 105 verse 3.
Most about His holy name, let the hearts of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.
Notice, we're encouraged to boast about Jehovah's holy name.
How do we do this?
Well, by preaching, teaching, helping others come to know Jehovah and His purposes.
And what is the result of this?
Well, honest hearted ones respond favorably, and they began to seek Jehovah.
And how are they affected?
Well, as a second part of that verse read, their hearts overflow with rejoicing.
Now, taking it a little further, how are we affected when we're able to help someone start seeking Jehovah
and to get on that road to everlasting life?
Well, it makes our hearts rejoice in that true.
And in fact, there are very few things in life that can bring more joy than helping someone start seeking Jehovah
and get on that narrow road to life.
I mean, think about it to explain Bible truth to them.
See, their face light up as little light bulbs start going off in their mind as they're learning these truths
to see them start making changes in their life.
To please Jehovah, to see them become an unbaptized publisher, come up from that baptismal pool,
maybe later get into the pioneer work, there's nothing this world can offer.
No accomplishment, no paycheck that can equal the joy of helping someone start seeking Jehovah.
Appropriately, throughout this second day of our program, we have been taught many ways.
We can improve in our disciple making skills, because it is vital that we do so, because eternal lives hang in the balance.
And what is the value of one eternal life?
Well, one brother said, if all of Jehovah's Witnesses pioneered until the end came, and one person learned the truth,
it would be worth it. That's the value of one life.
In fact, with all the money, the gold, the silver, the diamonds combined, you could not buy one eternal life.
It's priceless, but not one, almost 304,000, were helped to the point of baptism during the last service year.
As a result of Jehovah blessing, the disciple making skills of his people.
But as we mentioned before, learning disciple making skills now, prepares us for the even greater disciple making work of the New World.
In fact, let's talk about how vast this work will be, this educational work in the New World.
If we think about it, millions have been made disciples during these last years of the last days.
But in the New World, apparently, billions of disciples will need to be made.
How much greater is a billion than a million?
1,000 times greater!
So we're talking about thousands of times more disciples needing to be made than now.
And likely, we will carry on this work of disciple making in the New World for centuries, not just decades as the case in the last days.
And that is really something to think about.
In fact, it makes us think of what Jesus said to his disciples at John 1412.
He told them, you will do works greater than I am doing.
So really, we could say that that disciple making work of the New World will be greater.
More people will be witness to and made disciples a larger area, a longer period of time.
And undoubtedly, disciple making in the New World will be even more joyful than disciple making now.
Now we said before it's indescribable joy to make a disciple now, but why will it be even more enjoyable?
Well, think about the environment. Satan the devil will be gone.
That will be like a hundred pound block off all our shoulders.
The spirit of the world will no longer exist.
That spirit of the world exhale by Satan, because Satan will be locked in the abyss, and you could say it will be airtight.
He will not be able to exhale the spirit of the world from there.
One government will rule the entire earth.
All human governments will be gone.
And think of this, never again, never ever, will the unrighteous outnumber the righteous.
They will always be the minority.
So this wonderful environment will undoubtedly make disciple making even more exhilarating in the New World.
But now let's think for a moment about how voluminous the work itself will be.
John 528 and 29 says that all those in the memorial tombs will hear Jesus voice and come out all in the tombs,
who will be included among these ones that will come out of the memorial tombs.
We'll open up to Acts chapter 24.
And let's notice who will be included.
Acts 24 verse number 15.
And I have hoped toward God, which hope these men also look forward to, that there is going to be
a resurrection of both the righteous and the unrighteous.
So you notice it's guaranteed it is going to happen.
Not maybe good possibility, it's going to happen, and it's going to include the righteous and the unrighteous.
But now here's a question.
Why will the righteous who are resurrected need further education?
Well, even though they're already servants of God, they will need to learn details concerning fulfill prophecies,
the outworking of God's purposes, things that have happened since they died.
They'll need to be brought up to speed, so to speak.
And how much they'll need to be taught will depend largely upon how long ago they died.
They will also need help to continue in their righteous course and to obey the things written in the scrolls.
Revelation 20 verse 12 talks about these new scrolls.
It says, I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and scrolls were opened.
The dead were judged out of those things written in the scrolls according to their deeds.
And the watchtower said this about those new scrolls.
It said, these scrolls will most likely set forth Jehovah's requirements for mankind at that time.
By studying these, all people, including resurrected ones, will be able to know God's will for them.
These scrolls will surely give us further insight into Jehovah's mind.
That's exciting indeed to ponder, isn't it?
Included among the righteous, through resurrected, will be fateful ones, who will be brought back to serve as princes.
Psalm 45-16 says that Jesus will appoint princes in all the earth.
And the watchtower pointed out that one example would be Daniel.
Do you remember what Jehovah promised him shortly before he died?
He said, you will rest, but you will stand up for your lot at the end of the days.
Well, he's rested in the grave for some 2,500 years, but he'll stand up in the resurrection, and he'll take his position as one of these princes as pointed out in the watchtower.
Now, of course, Daniel and others like him will need to be brought up to speed, updated, trained for their assignments.
Also, many of the princes will be selected from the fateful elders who are taking the lead today as pointed out by the watchtower, but of course Jesus, the Messianic King, will make the appointments.
So what do we know?
They will be good appointments.
They will be princes who will truly love the people, and fatefully carry out all the directions of the heavenly government.
Also included, among the righteous to be resurrected, will be many of our loved ones, who may have thought they would live to see the end of this system.
But they died in the last days, but now what a joy it will be for you brothers and sisters to welcome these ones back and teach them about all the things that have happened since they died.
They'll need to be brought up to date, so they can help in this great disciple-making work, an example I think of my mother.
She was baptized in 1938.
She died in 2012, a little over eight years ago.
She really wanted to see the end of this system, and she was of that judge, brother for generation, really wanted to see that prostitute destroyed.
But cancer prevented that from happening.
And I remember shortly before she died, I said, Mom, I know you wanted to go into the New World, the overland passageway, never died all.
But you're going to have to take the underground tunnel.
But the main thing is to get there, and you're going to very shortly close your eyes, and the next thing you're going to see, you're going to open your eyes in that New World.
But when she comes back, just think of the things that have happened in the eight years she's been gone.
She'll have to be brought up to speed, won't she?
This is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses.
She didn't even know about the broadcast.
She'll have to be brought up to speed, but she'll be so happy to learn about this and other developments.
But here's a question, where will the billions of new disciples come from?
Even though the resurrected righteous ones will need to be educated, they're already disciples, aren't they?
So where will the new disciples come from?
Well, one's born after Armageddon.
We'll need to be made disciples.
Also, there'll be a vast multitude of unrighteous ones who will return from the grave.
Now, they'll come from all different backgrounds, and they'll come back, and they'll need to be taught.
They'll need help to accept Christ's ransom, to obey the things that are written in the New Scrolls,
because most of them will know nothing.
Now, maybe some studied a while, but death prevented them from continuing, but most will know nothing completely unaware about the good news.
And as we said, they'll come from all time periods, locations, cultures, some may have been rulers, maybe slaves, maybe criminals, maybe self-righteous persons, maybe once died in combat, died in childbirth,
died of disease, perhaps the coronavirus, died by starvation, natural disaster, and it seems that the last thought on their mind, when they died, will be the first thought when they come back.
I was thinking about the men who threw the three Hebrews into the fiery furnace, and they died because of the heat.
They'll come back with a vivid memory of that situation, and yet they'll have to be taught what happened after they died, how those three Hebrews came out, unharmed, see.
Just imagine all these backgrounds, of ones coming back.
Imagine situations it could develop.
Here's just an example. Imagine a former ruler had hundreds, maybe thousands of slaves, who catered to his every desire.
Now, he comes back in a resurrection, and his overseer is one of his former slaves.
And he tells him, gives him direction, loving direction, but direction, to plant a tree in a certain location.
Now, will he humble himself? Interesting, interesting possibilities. Think of the atheists who will be resurrected.
Here they ate Jehovah's food, they drank his water, they breathed his air, they walked on his ground, never gave him any credit.
Never acknowledged him at all. Makes us think of the illustration of the pig under the apple tree.
He gobbled up the apples off the ground, but he never looks up to see where they came from.
Now, we may not use that illustration with these atheists that come back, but they will have to be helped to see what a selfish life they lived.
And now, they're going to have to praise Jehovah, acknowledge, give him honor, glory, and worship.
Will they do so? Well, it will be up to them, but you brothers and sisters will help such ones.
In fact, let's just ponder, some of these ones will come back by means of some artwork.
Now, look at the following artwork, please, and it's going to show you people from different time periods, different backgrounds, being taught after they're resurrected.
And as the artwork displays, try to imagine yourself teaching ones of these various backgrounds.
And brothers and sisters, that artwork is just a little tiny sampling of ones from various time periods and backgrounds who will return to the land of the living.
But as we mentioned, Jehovah will empower Jesus to resurrect all of these ones, bringing them back from the memorial tombs.
They will hear his voice and they will come out. And we know it will be a controlled orderly way.
See, Jehovah is a God, not of disorder, but a peace, 1 Corinthians 1433.
He also wants things to take place decently and by arrangement, 1 Corinthians 1440.
So if they all came back at once, that would be a chaotic population explosion, wouldn't it?
They couldn't even be taught properly. They couldn't be cared for. We know it will be progressive during the thousand years.
And as I said this, faithful Christians who died shortly before the end of Satan's system will likely be among the first ones raised.
We can also expect an early resurrection for the faithful men of old who will serve as princes. We touched on that previously.
Yes, resurrected ones will have much to learn. And you dear brothers and sisters will have the privilege to help them see.
They'll need to learn about Jehovah, his qualities, all the wonderful things he's done.
Many will need to reject false religious ideas that they believed in Satan's world. Here's just an example.
Imagine one who really believed that all good people go to heaven. But now he's resurrected and he's brought back here to the earth.
Obviously he'll know that teaching was wrong. But what about other false teachings that he believed?
Will he change his mind and heart? Will he accept these truths? It'll be up to him.
You brothers and sisters will help such ones. There will be many others who will come back who will have to abandon their former way of life.
I was thinking as an example, a homosexual. Now this former homosexual comes back into resurrection and he really thought and he was taught and he came to believe that God accepted him with that lifestyle.
But now he's going to learn about Jehovah's moral standards and he's going to learn that Jehovah will not lower his standard to accommodate us.
We have to come up to Jehovah's standard. Will he change? Will he adjust? It'll be up to him. But you brothers and sisters will help such ones to enjoy life eternal.
All must learn to walk into Jehovah's righteous ways and willingly choose to do so.
But now what if someone refuses to make the necessary changes? Well the Watchtower commented on that. It said after being given ample time, maybe even a hundred years, to seek God, some will show that they refuse to practice righteousness.
Justly they will lose life in the New World. As we can see from Isaiah 65, verse 12, which says, and the center will be cursed, even though he is a hundred years of age.
But we expect this will be the minority, that the majority will be delighted to make the adjustments so they can live in that wonderful New World.
But I think about what one brother told me concerning his Bible student, his Bible student kept saying, well, you know, how do I know I'm going to like life in the New World?
How do I know I'm not going to be bored? Well, finally the brother told him he said, well, one thing about it, if you don't like being there, you don't have to stay.
Now it's kind of humorous, but a lot of truth. A person has to willingly want to be there, make the necessary changes, but we believe the vast majority will be delighted to do so.
And what a privilege it will be to teach ones in that New World a time when Isaiah 119 will be true, which says the earth will certainly be filled with a knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the sea.
I mean, think about it. This earth 71% of its surface is covered with water.
And if you smooth all the land out, sea water would cover the planet earth one and two thirds miles deep. This is a watery planet, isn't it?
Well, that illustration there in Isaiah just shows how prolific, how widespread, how filthy earth will be with a knowledge of Jehovah at that time.
And that wonderful knowledge will enable faithful humans to grow to perfection and to sufficiently be equipped to face and pass the final test at the end of the thousand years.
And the good things that you dear brothers and sisters have learned today, this second day of our program, what you've learned today about helping your Bible students now will help you in the New World.
As you learn, you learned how to teach your Bible students to feed themselves spiritually, to attend the meetings, to avoid bad associations, to overcome unclean habits, to develop a personal relationship with Jehovah.
See those very same things you will need to teach these new ones that come back in the resurrection.
So at this time, let's review some of the good things that we have learned today about disciple making and let's meditate on how these skills will help in the New World.
In fact, look at this video, please, a brief video that gives us some highlights from our first symposium which was entitled, Improve Your Skills.
Since there's no death or pain in heaven, where would this promise apply? The earth.
Would you like to learn how to be part of that future?
If these are God's promises, wouldn't it make sense to go to His Word to find out how to enjoy them?
Maybe we can think of it this way.
When parents with a severe genetic defect have children, what happens?
I get it.
No study's perfect. She's making some effort. Focus on that.
If anyone's infusual as a miscontagious, it's yours.
I can help if you want.
The real question is, do you trust Him?
I won't do. I really do.
As we saw in that video, we want to improve our skills.
And in the symposium, we saw six areas in which we can improve our skills.
And each one of the six videos in that symposium discuss one of those skills.
In review, Nita in the first video, the Bible study conductor, use questions to help the interested person see the practical value of the Bible.
In the second video, next time they met, Nita unleashed the power of God's Word by showing her student scriptures that highlight our spiritual need.
In the third video, Nita illustrated a damaged sin by likening it to inherited illness.
In the fourth video, when our Bible students seem to be losing interest, Nita learned the importance of enthusiasm to motivate.
In the fifth video, Nita showed empathy for her student's stressful circumstances and provided practical help.
And then in the last, the sixth video, Nita's conviction and scriptural reasoning helped to reach her student's heart so that she reconsidered her situation and her views on morals.
Can you just imagine how those six skills you'll use in the New World?
Think about it. You'll use questions, won't you?
You'll use questions to help resurrected ones see the practical value of the Bible and the new scrolls.
And by the way, the Bible will be used in the New World.
You will unleash the power of God's Word and the power of the scrolls by showing these new one's scriptures.
You will use good illustrations to help them reason.
You will use enthusiasm to motivate.
You will show empathy, especially for ones who have scars as a result of a horrible life in Satan's Old World.
You will also use conviction and scriptural reasoning to reach their heart.
But now let's move to our second symposium.
And it was entitled, Accept Jehovah's Help.
And we discussed three aids Jehovah gives us.
Let's look at this brief video that will remind us of that second symposium.
Her real issue was getting to know someone she can't see.
Maybe that's the best place to begin.
I did some research and I think you really like what I found.
Come, come, sit down.
I've tried everything to get Jane to a meeting.
Have you tried bringing other people on the study?
You were in a band.
I love that song.
I actually have that vinyl.
Look, I know you're busy.
I have no clue, do you?
I've got to go.
So I asked him to help Jane.
Then left it with him.
Well as reminded in that video, Jehovah provides research tools.
He provides the brotherhood.
And he provides help by means of prayer.
And you'll use those things in the new world, obviously.
See, just like Anita, she used research tools to prepare to discuss evolution with her student.
When she realized she had limited understanding of the student's background,
she sought help from the brotherhood.
She brought along a publisher who had a similar background to her student.
And that third video, when her student resisted,
Anita's encouragement to prepare for her Bible study,
Anita prayed to Jehovah to help her and to motivate the student.
And you know, Jehovah hears prayers.
But imagine you'll use research tools.
You'll use the brotherhood.
You'll use prayer to make disciples in the new world.
But now let's go to that third symposium.
Help your Bible students too.
And we talked about five things we wanted to help them to do.
Let's look at this video, which will remind us of that third symposium.
Which do you remember more from our studies?
All the things that touch your heart.
It's asking how Jehovah feels about something.
And then what that means for me.
My meeting part tonight covers that point.
Why don't you come?
I'm having some people over this weekend.
It wasn't the club.
But it was still fun.
Eating it felt impossible.
Being made new in your dominant mental attitude.
I remember one of the Psalms.
I will walk in your truth.
Unify my heart to fear your name.
Well as reminded, there are five things we want to help our students to accomplish.
That first video in this symposium.
Anita helped her student learn to feed herself spiritually.
By demonstrating how she herself prepared for their study.
The second video, Anita returned to the subject of meeting attendance
by pointing out that the next meeting would consider a question she had raised previously.
The third video.
Anita helped her student to seek good association by arranging for her to attend a Christian gathering.
Then the fourth video, when it became clear that the student was not ready to be a publisher
because of an unclean practice, Anita gently helped her to appreciate what it means to become
and remain clean in Jehovah's eyes.
And then the last video that's fifth one most important.
Anita helped her student to develop strong love for Jehovah that would be so strong
she would be able to resist pressure from the world.
Well, you can imagine you'll use the very same skills.
You'll try to help your students there to accomplish the same five things we discussed.
You'll help them to learn to feed themselves spiritually.
You'll help them to attend meetings.
You'll help them to see the need to seek out good association,
to avoid unclean practices and most importantly to develop deep love for Jehovah.
Yes, it's obvious that our skills, our experience, our qualities,
learn now in the disciple making work will be very valuable in the new world.
You'll be able to put these skills to good use then, see?
So let's all strive to improve as teachers.
And that's what Titus 1.9 says that we should hold firmly to the faithful word
as respects our art of teaching.
And we want to be artists, the art of teaching.
You may have heard the difference between a laborer, a craftsman, and an artist.
A laborer uses his back.
A craftsman has to add his mind, but an artist adds his heart.
We don't want to be just laborers, craftsmen, but artists,
really putting our heart into the disciple making work.
And it does take effort.
Let's look at one last scripture here.
1 Timothy chapter 4.
The effort involved, but it's worth the effort.
1 Timothy 4 verse 15.
Ponder over these things.
Be absorbed in them so that your advancement may be plainly seen
by all people.
Pay constant attention to yourself and your teaching.
Persevere in these things.
For by doing this, you will save both yourself and those who listen to you.
That's true now.
It will be true in the new world.
And Jehovah is providing what we need.
He's giving us excellent training.
He provides excellent tools.
We want to make good use of both of these provisions,
but we do want to give this caution.
Don't be overwhelmed, please.
We've discussed a lot of skills, a lot of suggestions,
but don't be overwhelmed.
Jehovah's going to help you.
He will bless your efforts to do your best.
And we encourage you to just pick out one or two skills at first.
And work on those.
And then you can move on to other things.
In conclusion, think about this,
there are many secular skills practiced today
that will not even exist in the new world.
Doctors, no doctors, nurses, optometrist, undertakers,
locksmiths, lawyers.
Such professions will not even exist.
But your skills, as a disciple maker,
will be in high demand.
You will be able to use these skills to the full.
And you will definitely rejoice greatly
as you share in this voluminous,
this enormous new world educational campaign
soon to come.
Thank you, Brother Let, for that exciting preview
of the work that lies ahead of us.
This program has highlighted the joy we can find
in making disciples.
What can we look forward to in the next two sessions?
The Scripture theme for those sessions is taken from Psalm 37-4,
which says, Find exquisite delight in Jehovah
and He will grant you the desires of your heart.
The next session begins with a symposium
that will show how we can imitate the Apostle Paul
and others by rejoicing in all circumstances.
In the final session,
we will enjoy the conclusion of the Nehemiah drama
followed by an uplifting closing talk.
Now, let all inattentance stand
if you are able to do so and sing together song number 140.
This song invites us to imagine our future joy.
It is entitled Life Without End at Last.
After the song, you may have your local concluding prayer.
Again, that song number 140.